AirTanker Services Limited, incorporated in England and Wales on 14 July 2007 (2007-07-14), is a private limited company in the United Kingdom, operating as AirTanker, a British aircraft leasing and operating company.  Under contract to the British Government, it provides a fleet of fourteen Airbus A330 MRTT multi-role tanker / transport aircraft, known by the service name Voyager, to the Royal Air Force (RAF) as a tanker aircraft for aerial refuelling, troop and cargo transport, and aeromedical roles.  For additional revenue, it operates air charter flights using reserve aircraft, operating as a civilian airline.AirTanker Services is owned by a consortium of Airbus, Rolls-Royce plc, Cobham plc, Babcock International, and Thales Group.  Its registered office is AirTanker Hub at RAF Brize Norton in Oxfordshire.


== History ==
In March 2008, the Ministry of Defence signed the finalised Future Strategic Tanker Aircraft (FSTA) contract with AirTanker to provide the Royal Air Force (RAF) with an air transport and air-to-air refuelling capability.  This capability was to provide a modern replacement for the RAF's ageing fleet of aerial refuelling tankers, namely the Vickers VC10 and Lockheed TriStar.  As well as supporting the RAF, AirTanker holds a United Kingdom Civil Aviation Authority Type A Operating Licence, permitting it to carry passengers, cargo, and mail on aircraft with 20 or more seats.On 12 May 2012, AirTanker Sponsored Reservists for No. 10 Squadron RAF began RAF operations of the Voyager by operating a military air transport sortie to RAF Akrotiri in Cyprus from its home base of RAF Brize Norton.Following the granting of an air operating licence, the airline flew its first charter flight to RAF Akrotiri in Cyprus for the UK Ministry of Defence in January 2013.  After delays in certification due to issues with the drogue baskets, its first operational aerial refuelling flight took place on 20 May 2013.  Following subsequent successful Voyager tanker operations to all operational RAF and allied receivers, in late 2013, No. 101 Squadron RAF retired all their VC10s and became the second squadron alongside 10 Squadron to operate the Voyager.From October 2013, AirTanker's civilian crews provide the twice-weekly scheduled passenger flights using an aircraft with a single-class cabin of 291 premium economy seats between RAF Brize Norton and RAF Mount Pleasant on the Falkland Islands, known as the South Atlantic Air Bridge, mainly for military personnel and contractors, though fare-paying passengers are also allowed to travel.  These flights formerly refuelled at RAF Ascension Island but due to the deteriorating condition of its runway, the refuelling stop is now at Blaise Diagne International Airport in Cape Verde.  During the COVID-19 pandemic, this was moved to Dakar.  However, in June 2020, G-VYGM set a record by flying direct from Brize Norton to Mount Pleasant without refuelling.In May 2015, AirTanker leased one aircraft to Thomas Cook Airlines to be deployed on holiday routes.  The contract ran for three years, and involved mainly long haul flights from Glasgow, Manchester, and London Stansted Airport.  The first commercial flight took place on 1 May 2015 from Manchester to Cancun and Punta Cana.On 30 September 2016, AirTanker reached the final establishment phase milestone in the Future Strategic Tanker Aircraft (FSTA) programme with the achievement of Full Service Date on time and on budget delivering all fourteen aircraft.
In 2017, AirTanker established a new base at Manchester Airport to support its leasing operations.  The same year, members of AirTankers' cabin crew were seconded to Thomas Cook Airlines, fostering its existing relationship and facilitating training of A330 cabin crew for Thomas Cook Airlines.Two AirTanker Voyagers operated by the RAF were involved in combat missions in support of Operation Shader, supplying fuel for RAF Typhoons and F-35Bs, US Marine Corps AV-8B Harriers and F/A-18 Hornets, and other coalition aircraft.  The Voyager KC3s were part of No. 903 Expeditionary Air Wing, based at RAF Akrotiri in Cyprus.


== Personnel and support ==
AirTanker owns the entire fleet of fourteen aircraft under the terms of its contract with the UK government.  Furthermore, AirTanker provides full support infrastructure to service and maintain the fleet, operational management, personnel training, and some specific aircraft crews.  For RAF operations, this latter includes pilots and engineers who are classed as 'Sponsored Reservists'.Its surge fleet used as civilian air charter are operated by AirTanker pilots, but draw cabin crew from the respective civilian airliner they operate for.


== Fleet ==
AirTanker has a 27-year contract to provide fourteen aircraft, all Airbus A330 MRTT powered by a pair of Rolls-Royce Trent 772B turbofan engines: a 'core' fleet of nine military aircraft, eight with military registrations and one civilian registration, and a 'surge' fleet of five civil registered demilitarised aircraft (similar to A330-200 standard configuration) which it uses for additional revenue.  The surge fleet can be recalled for military use as required.    This subsequently increased to a military core fleet of ten aircraft, the civilian surge fleet reducing to four.

Note: one RAF Voyager is permanently based at RAF Mount Pleasant in the Falkland Islands as part of No. 1312 Flight RAF to provide aerial refuelling for the four quick reaction alert (QRA) Typhoon FGR4 fighter jets of No. 1435 Flight RAF and the A400M Atlas (and its former C-130 Hercules) transport aircraft.  A second Voyager operated by AirTanker is used twice weekly to provide the airbridge between RAF Brize Norton in the UK and RAF Mount Pleasant in the South Atlantic.


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to AirTanker Services at Wikimedia Commons
Official website