The Chet Ton dynasty (Thai: เชื้อเจ็ดตน; RTGS: Chuea Chet Ton; Thai pronunciation: [tɕʰɯ́a.tɕèt.ton], Northern Thai pronunciation: [tɕɯ́a.tɕĕt.tǒn]; meaning "the dynasty of the seven lords"), also spelled Jedton, or officially Thipphachakkrathiwong dynasty or Thipphachak dynasty in the Royal Society of Thailand's spelling style or Dibayachakkradhiwongse dynasty in Prajadhipok's spelling style (Thai: ราชวงศ์ทิพย์จักราธิวงศ์ or ราชวงศ์ทิพย์จักร) is a dynasty that ruled three northern states of Siam, which consisted of Chiang Mai, the largest, Lampang and Lamphun.


== History ==

It was established towards the end of the reign of King Thai Sa of Ayutthaya by Thipchang of Nan, a mahout and woodsman who was appointed ruler of Lampang City for good military deeds. Afterwards his grandson, urged by King Kavila, helped restore southern Lanna with the help of the royal army of King Taksin the Great of Thonburi.
The Chet Ton dynasty is noted for having formed ties with other older Lannanese dynasties such as the Mangrai and Chiengsaen dynasties of which King Mangrai the Great and Phya Ngammuang were respective members thereby incorporating them into the dynasty through marriage.
Moreover, many female members of the Chet Ton dynasty intermarried with members of the Chakri dynasty; two such worth noting are Princess Sri Anocha, sister of King Kawila of Chiang Mai and wife of Maha Sura Singhanat who was the younger brother and right hand of the first monarch of the Chakri dynasty of Siam, and Princess Dara Rasmi, daughter of King Inthawichayanon of Chiang Mai and one of the princess consorts of Chulalongkorn, King Rama V of Siam. It is held that such a bond between the two dynasties, forged since the dawn of the Bangkok Era, proved to help ease the transition of Lanna into the lands of Siam proper.


=== Seven lords of Thipchang ===
Kawila (กาวิละ), 3rd Ruler of Lampang and 1st Ruler of Chiangmai
Khamsom (คำสม), 4th Ruler of Lampang
Thammalangka (ธัมลังกา), 2nd Ruler of Chiangmai
Duangthip (ดวงทิพย์), 5th Ruler of Lampang
Moolah (หมูหล้า), Viceroy of Lampang
Khamfan (คำฟั่น), 1st Ruler of Lamphun and 3rd Ruler of Chiangmai
Boonma (บุญมา), 2nd Ruler of Lamphun


== References ==

The Chronicles of Chiang Mai Ed.2, trans. David K. Wyatt and Aroonrat Wichienkaeo, Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 1998, pp141–157 ISBN 974-7100-62-2
Ongsakul, Sarassawadee, History of Lanna, trans. Chitraporn Tanratanakul, Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, Thai text 2001, English text 2005, pp129–143 ISBN 974-9575-84-9
Suryadinata, L. (2012). Southeast Asian Personalities of Chinese Descent: A Biographical Dictionary, Volume I & II. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.