Chinnanati Snehitulu (transl. Childhood Friends) is a 1971 Indian Telugu-language drama film, produced by DVS Raju under the DVS Productions banner and directed by K. Viswanath. It stars N. T. Rama Rao, Sobhan Babu and Vanisri, with music composed by T. V. Raju.


== Plot ==
The film begins with two childhood soulmates Srinivas Rao & Sridhar Rao. Sridhar Rao is a tycoon whereas Srinivas Rao works as his manager. Sridhar Rao's daughter Aruna is pampered and doted on by Srinivasa Rao. Nagabhushnam a black-hearted brother-in-law Sridhar Rao ruses to clutch their property by knitting Aruna with his idiotic son Rambabu. He also envies with prioritization & supremacy of Srinivasa Rao. Besides, Srinivasa Rao leads a delightful life with his ideal wife Lalitha, and blind mother. Once Aruna visits her friend's nuptial, acquainted with her childhood friend Ravi when they crush and consummates. Meanwhile, Sridhar Rao gets a heart attack when Aruna arrives home and notices she is pregnant. Then, Ravi as an Air Force pilot becomes a victim of a crash. Being cognizant of it, Aruna collapses and explains the plight to Srinivas Rao. Now he gamely plans with Lalitha by announcing she is pregnant. He also convinces Sridhar Rao and brings Aruna to his house as a nurse. Aruna gives birth to the baby boy and back. However, as of now, a different question arises, Lalitha also conceives and she too gives birth to the baby boy. Nagabhushanam discerns it, abducts the child, and imperils Aruna to espouse Rambabu. Aruna agrees and states her decision to Sridhar which leads to his death. Next, Aruna is forced to ostracize Srinivasa Rao. Whereat, he feels something fishy, lands in disguise, and ceases Nagabhushanam. At last, Ravi that dodges a bullet also returns. Finally, the movie ends on a happy note with the reunion of the family.


== Cast ==
N. T. Rama Rao as Srinivasa Rao
Sobhan Babu as Ravi
Vanisri as Aruna
Jaggayya as Sridhar Rao
Devika as Lalitha
Rajanala as Nagabhushanam
Raja Babu as Ramababu
Rao Gopal Rao
Allu Ramalingaiah as Paanakaalu
Santha Kumari
Rama Prabha as Baby
Pushpa Kumari as Kasthuri


== Soundtrack ==
Music composed by T. V. Raju. Lyrics were written by C. Narayana Reddy.  


== References ==


== External links ==