DJ Alber Ensso (Armenian: Ալբերտ Կուրշուդյան, original name – Albert Kurshudyan) is an Armenian DJ and music producer.He started his career in the capital city of Armenia, Yerevan, back in 2016. During these years he had a huge success, specifically he has managed to share the stage with many international artists, such as Boris Brejcha, Space Motion, Miss Monique, Alex Niggeman, Tebra, Zuma Dionys, Robert Babicz.
In 2021 Alber made a decision to move to Dubai. Not only is he a resident DJ at one of the most popular bars of Dubai, Vaga Dubai, but also is the co-founder of Vaga Music Label.By all counts, 2022 was the most productive year for Alber Ensso. At the beginning of the year, he came up with a successful release on the Alber Ensso Cyberpunk label created by him and his team, and supported by different world remarkable artists.In November, he performed in Formula 1 racing. In 2022 he also performed at one of the most famous festivals in Dubai, Kaynouna Festival, which was attended by more than 3,000 people from different parts of the world.In 2023, he performed in the other famous festival in Dubai, the Odyssey Festival. In the same year, DJ Alber Ensso's Live Set was released at the Sevan Writers' House.


== Career ==
He started his music classes at 10. Aged 12 he started practicing Logic Pro, the digital audio workstation and MIDI sequencer software application, making his first steps in producing music. In 2014 Albert successfully graduated from Alexander Hekimyan Music School. At 19 he started his solo work, becoming one of the most prominent icons on the Armenian electronic scene.
DJ Alber Ensso presented his first single, Easter Rhapsody, to the public on April 22, 2019, during a joint live show with Robert Babicz, at the largest pavilion of Armenfilm movie studio in Yerevan, Armenia.
Alber Ensso says: "A DJ’s credo is to create good music, and each single is simply their business card to ensure the next one happens." The musical genres that have influenced him the most are Organic House, Progressive House, Melodic house and Techno. His musical style today is Organic House, Afro house and in fact he tried many other genres too, until he found his style. He says: "From the past there are many differences from now as I evolved into my natural style and found my own wave. I came from Armenia where I lived 21 years and it did influence on my style, because it does bring a new sense into the music for example popular music instruments in Armenia like Duduk or Qanon".


== Stage name ==
His initial stage name highlights the special bond he developed with the ocean, and the endlessly romantic worldview his music reflects.
To avoid confusion with other DJ Oceans, it was decided to expand the stage name, and in 2019 a special poll was initiated on Facebook to change his stage name, and of the twelve options, about 20,000 followers opted for DJ Alber Ensso.


== Live performance in Armenfilm ==

The live show in iconic Soviet-era film studio Armenfilm on April 22, 2019, was named a "discovery" by local media. The huge platform was mentioned not able to involve all the masses, who wanted to join.
"The audience was really cut off from everything. Feeling was that you are in a good European club where people come in for good sound and amazing light effects. And most importantly, in a great environment where you feel yourself relaxed. Regardless of your music preferences, you spend terrific time through a morning with strangers who turn out to be your soulmates, enjoying together fresh sounds, bits and vibrations", Armenian media reported of the event. "The main goal of the organizers of this mega event is to make Armenia one of the major electronic music centers.  We want to engage the greatest of the musicians into our initiative", DJ Alber Ensso, author of the event, told NEWS.am STYLE.


== Aragats mountain record ==
On July 11, 2019 for about two hours DJ Alber Ensso's mix of progressive house, melodic techno and underground was resounding on the mountain Aragats, at the altitude of 3,153 meters. He thus became the first DJ in Armenia to successfully mix these styles into an invigorating and unique sound. The performance was registered in "the Book of heroes" – the Armenian analogue of the Guinness Book of Records.Vartan Tovmasyan, the President of the "Association of Heroes", who was present at the event notes: 

"This was quite a challenge DJ Alber Ensso successfully mastered. You have to deal with sound, pressure and breathing. In addition to the pressure fluctuations at such an elevation, which is a serious problem by itself, there is also the problem of ensuring a good music sound.  The music becomes almost ‘uncontrollable’ in the strong wind and open air: the sound comes and goes with the wind, which causes serious mixing problems. DJ Alber Ensso did a masterful work!"


== Personal life ==
Alber Ensso was born in Armenia on May 30, 1999, and grew up in the capital Yerevan. He obtained his bachelor's degree in sociology from the Yerevan State University (YSU) in 2022.
Alber has been practicing karate for thirteen years. He took a bronze in Armenia Karate Open Championship in 2014, and the first prize in the closed Armenia Karate Championship in 2015. Albert won a gold in Armenia Karate Open Championship in 2016.
The Armenian media has dubbed him "the charming heart-breaker".


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website