Female hysteria was once a common medical diagnosis for women, which was described as exhibiting a wide array of symptoms, including anxiety, shortness of breath, fainting, nervousness, sexual desire, insomnia, fluid retention, heaviness in the abdomen, irritability, loss of appetite for food or sex, (paradoxically) sexually forward behavior, and a "tendency to cause trouble for others". It is no longer recognized by medical authorities as a medical disorder. Its diagnosis and treatment were routine for hundreds of years in Western Europe.In Western medicine, hysteria was considered both common and chronic among women. Even though it was categorized as a disease, hysteria's symptoms were synonymous with normal functioning female sexuality. In extreme cases, the woman may have been forced to enter an insane asylum or to have undergone surgical hysterectomy.


== Early history ==

The history of hysteria can be traced to ancient times. Dating back to 1900 BC in ancient Egypt, the first descriptions of hysteria within the female body were found recorded on the Kahun Papyri. In this culture, the womb was thought capable of affecting much of the rest of the body, but "there is no warrant for the fanciful view that the ancient Egyptians believed that a variety of bodily complaints were due to an animate, wandering womb". Uterine prolapse was also known.In ancient Greece, wandering womb was described in the gynecological treatise of the Hippocratic Corpus, "Diseases of Women", which dates back to the 5th and 4th centuries BC. Plato's dialogue Timaeus compares a woman's uterus to a living creature that wanders throughout a woman's body, "blocking passages, obstructing breathing, and causing disease". Aretaeus of Cappadocia described the uterus as "an animal within an animal" (less emotively, "a living thing inside a living thing"), which causes symptoms by wandering around a woman's body putting pressure on other organs. Timaeus also argued that the uterus is "sad and unfortunate" when it does not join with a male or bear child. The standard cure for this "hysterical suffocation" was scent therapy, in which good smells were placed under a woman's genitals and bad odors at the nose, while sneezing could be also induced to drive the uterus back to its correct place. The concept of a pathological "wandering womb" was later viewed as the source of the term hysteria, which stems from the Greek cognate of uterus, ὑστέρα (hystera), although the word hysteria does not feature in ancient Greek medicine: 'the noun is not used in this period'.While in the Hippocratic texts a wide range of women were susceptible – including in particular the childless – Galen in the 2nd century omitted the childless and saw the most vulnerable group as "widows, and particularly those who previously menstruated regularly, had been pregnant and were eager to have intercourse, but were now deprived of all this" (On the Affected Parts, 6.5). He also denied that the womb could "move from one place to another like a wandering animal". His treatments included scent therapy and sexual intercourse, but also rubbing in ointments to the external genitalia; this was to be performed by midwives, not physicians.While most Hippocratic writers saw the retention of menstrual blood in the womb as a key problem, for Galen even more serious was the retention of "female seed". This was believed to be thinner than male seed and could be retained in the womb. Hysteria was referred to as "the widow's disease", because the female semen was believed to turn venomous if not released through regular climax or intercourse. If the patient was married, this could be completed by intercourse with their spouse. Other than participating in sexual intercourse, it was thought that fumigating the body with special fragrances would supposedly draw the uterus back to its natural spot in the female body. Foul smells applied to the nose would drive it down, and pleasant scents at the vulva would attract it.


== Middle Ages, Renaissance, and the early modern period ==
Through the Middle Ages, another cause of dramatic symptoms could be found: demonic possession. It was thought that demoniacal forces were attracted to those who were prone to melancholy, particularly to single women and the elderly. When a patient could not be diagnosed or cured of a disease, it was thought that the symptoms of what would now be diagnosed as mental illness, were actually those of someone possessed by the devil. After the 17th century, the correlation of demonic possession and hysteria were gradually discarded and instead was described as behavioral deviance, a medical issue.In the 16th and 17th centuries, hysteria was still believed to be due to the retention of humour or fluids in the uterus, sexual deprivation, or by the tendency of the uterus to wander around the female body causing irritability and suffocation. Self-treatment such as masturbation, was not recommended and was also considered taboo. Marriage, and regular sexual encounters with her husband, was still the most highly recommended long-term course of treatment for a woman with hysteria. It was thought to purge the uterus of any built-up fluid, and semen was thought to have healing properties, In this model, ejaculation outside the vagina was conducive to uterine disease since the female genitalia did not receive the health benefits of male emission. Some physicians regarded all contraceptive practices as injurious to women for this reason. Giovanni Matteo Ferrari da Gradi cited marriage and childbearing as a cure for the disease. If pleasure was obtained from them, then hysteria could be cured. If a woman was unmarried, or widowed, manual stimulation by a midwife involving certain oils and scents was recommended to purge the uterus of any fluid retention. Lack of marriage was also thought to be the cause of most melancholy in single women, such as nuns or widows. Studies of the causes and effects of hysteria were continued in the 16th and 17th century by medical professionals such as Ambroise Pare, Thomas Sydenham, and Abraham Zacuto, who published their findings furthering medical knowledge of the disease, and informing treatment. Physician Abraham Zacuto writes in his Praxis Medica Admiranda from 1637,

'Because of retention of the sexual fluid, the heart and surrounding areas are enveloped in a morbid and moist exudation: this is especially true of the more lascivious females, inclined to venery, passionate women who are most eager to experience physical pleasure; if she is of this type she cannot ever be relieved by any aid except that of her parents who are advised to find her a husband. Having done so the man's strong and vigorous intercourse alleviated the frenzy.'
There was continued debate about whether it was morally acceptable for a physician to remove excess female seed through genital manipulation of the female patient; Pieter van Foreest (Forestus) and Giovanni Matteo da Grado (Gradus) insisted on using midwives as intermediaries, and regarded the treatment as the last resort.


== 18th century ==
In the 18th century, hysteria slowly became associated with mechanisms in the brain rather than the uterus. This is also when it was noted both men and women could contract hysteria. French physician Philippe Pinel freed hysteria patients detained in Paris' Salpêtrière sanatorium on the basis that kindness and sensitivity were needed to formulate good care. Another French physician, Francois de Sauvages de La Croix believed some common signs of female hysteria were "tears and laughter, oscitation [yawning], pandiculation (stretching and yawning), suffocating angina (chest pain) or dyspnea (shortness of breath), dysphagia (difficulty swallowing), delirium, a close and driving pulse, a swollen abdomen, cold extremities, and abundant and clear urine."


== 19th century ==
Jean-Martin Charcot argued that hysteria derived from a neurological disorder and showed that it was more common in men than women. Charcot's theories of hysteria being a physical condition of the mind and not of the body led to a more scientific and analytical approach to hysteria in the 19th century. He dispelled the beliefs that hysteria had anything to do with the supernatural and attempted to define it medically. Charcot's use of photography, and the resulting concretization of women's expressions of health and distress, continued to influence women's experiences of seeking healthcare. Though older ideas persisted during this era, over time female hysteria began to be thought of less as a physical ailment and more of a psychological one.George Beard, a physician who cataloged an incomplete list including 75 pages of possible symptoms of hysteria, claimed that almost any ailment could fit the diagnosis. Physicians thought that the stress associated with the typical female life at the time caused civilized women to be both more susceptible to nervous disorders and to develop faulty reproductive tracts. One American physician expressed pleasure in the fact that the country was "catching up" to Europe in the prevalence of hysteria.According to Pierre Roussel and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, femininity was a natural and essential desire for women: "Femininity is for both authors an essential nature, with defined functions, and the disease is explained by the non-fulfillment of natural desire." It was during the industrial revolution and the major development of cities and modern lifestyles that disruption of this natural appetite was thought to cause lethargy or melancholy, leading to hysteria. At the time female patients sought medical practitioners for the massage treatment of hysteria. The rate of hysteria was so great in the socially restrictive industrial period that women were prone to carry smelling salts about their person in case they swooned, reminiscent of Hippocrates' theory of using odors to coerce the uterus back into place. For physicians, manual massage treatment was becoming laborious and time-consuming, and they were seeking a way to increase productivity.Rachel Maines hypothesized that physicians from the classical era until the early 20th century commonly treated hysteria by manually stimulating the genitals of, i. e. masturbating, female patients to the point of orgasm, which was denominated "hysterical paroxysm", and that the inconvenience of this may have motivated the original development of and market for the vibrator. Other hysteria treatments included pregnancy, marriage, heterosexual sex, and the application of smelling oils on female genitals. Although Maines's theory that hysteria was treated by masturbating female patients to orgasm is widely repeated in the literature on female anatomy and sexuality, some historians dispute Maines's claims regarding the prevalence of this treatment for hysteria and its relevance to the invention of the vibrator, describing them as a distortion of the evidence or that they are only relevant to a very small group. In 2018, Hallie Lieberman and Eric Schatzberg of Georgia Institute of Technology challenged Maines's claims for the use of electromechanical vibrators to treat hysteria in the 19th century. Maines stated that her theory of the prevalence of masturbation for hysteria and its relevance to the invention of the vibrator is a hypothesis and not proven fact.Frederick Hollick was a firm believer that a main cause of hysteria was licentiousness present in women.


== Freud and decline of diagnosis ==

During the early 20th century, the number of women diagnosed with female hysteria sharply declined. This decline has been attributed to many factors. Some medical authors claim that the decline was due to gaining a greater understanding of the psychology behind conversion disorders such as hysteria.With so many possible symptoms, historically hysteria was considered a catchall diagnosis where any unidentifiable ailment could be assigned. As diagnostic techniques improved, the number of ambiguous cases that might have been attributed to hysteria declined. For instance, before the introduction of electroencephalography, epilepsy was frequently confused with hysteria.Sigmund Freud claimed that hysteria was not anything physical at all but an emotional, internal condition that could affect both males and females, which was caused by previous trauma that led to the affected being unable to enjoy sex in the normal way. This would later lead to Freud's development of the Oedipus complex, which connotes femininity as a failure, or lack of masculinity. Although these earlier studies had shown that men were also prone to have hysteria, including Freud himself, over time, the condition was related mainly to issues of femininity as the continued study of hysteria took place only in women. Many cases that had previously been labeled hysteria were reclassified by Freud as anxiety neuroses.  Sigmund Freud was fascinated by cases of hysteria. He thought that hysteria may have been related to the unconscious mind and separate from the conscious mind or the ego. He was convinced that deep conflicts in the mind, some concerning instinctual drives for sex and aggression, were driving the behavior of those with hysteria. Freud developed psychoanalysis in order to help patients that had been diagnosed with hysteria reduce internal conflicts causing physical and emotional suffering.  While hysteria was reframed with reference to new laws and was new in principle, its recommended treatment in psychoanalysis would remain what Bernheimer observes it had been for centuries: marrying and having babies and in this way regaining the "lost" phallus.New theories relating to hysteria came from pure speculation; doctors and physicians could not connect symptoms to the disorder, causing it to decline rapidly as a diagnosis.Today, female hysteria is no longer a recognized illness, but different manifestations of hysteria are recognized in other conditions such as schizophrenia, borderline personality disorder, conversion disorder, and anxiety attacks.


== Relationship with women's rights and feminism ==
The most vehement negative statements associating feminism with hysteria came during the militant suffrage campaign.
The American Psychiatric Association did not drop the term "hysteria" until the 1950s. By the 1980s, feminists began to reclaim hysteria, using it as a symbol of the systematic oppression of women and reclaiming the term for themselves. Especially among sex-positive feminists, who believe sexual repression and having it called hysteria is a form of oppression. The idea stemmed from the belief that Hysteria was a kind of pre-feminist rebellion against the oppressive defined social roles placed upon women. Feminist writers such as Catherine Clément and Hélène Cixous wrote in The Newly Born Woman from a place of opposition to the theories proposed in psychoanalytical works, pushing against the notion that socially constructed femininities and hysteria are natural to being female. Feminist social historians of both genders argue that hysteria is caused by women's oppressed social roles, rather than by their bodies or psyches, and they have sought its sources in cultural myths of femininity and in male domination.


== Cultural Commentary ==
The medical field today reflects issues of sexism and prejudice, the same issues that women, who were viewed and treated during the early conceptualization of female hysteria, also faced. Many notable women from different backgrounds have published their testimonial experiences and research regarding the health disparities in the female population and commonly reference the power dynamic between the doctor-patient relationship that continues to exist in the 21st century.


=== Audre Lorde ===

One example of a personal work that brought awareness to women’s experiences with illness, diagnosis, and struggles as a result of the medical industry is Audre Lorde's book The Cancer Journals.The Cancer Journals has three chronological sections that describe Lorde’s experience with her cancer diagnosis. It takes on a feminist tone and is an example of a piece that works to decolonize self-care and change the stigmas surrounding women with breast cancer. The first section centers around the discovery of Lorde’s breast tumor, the second details her experience undergoing the mastectomy, and the third showcase Lorde rejecting her prosthesis and her take on a prosthesis for women post-mastectomy as a whole. In the book, she speaks about her experience and brings to light the emotional turmoil that women undergoing mastectomies and breast cancer experience. Lorde voices her own opinions, emotions, and perspective on breast cancer, challenging the existing cultural taboo of speaking about cancer. Lorde touches upon pre-existing societal norms and issues such as culturally-defined standards of beauty and what the definition of healthy looks like. She writes about how these problems translate into her personal battle against societal definitions and pressures along with many other minorities’ experiences with the medical industry. Lorde broadens her individual experiences and emotions with feelings shared by other minorities and women who went through similar events. Lorde’s voice, work, and messages are similarly referenced and echoed by Gaulkinson Gay in The Cancer Journals: Bones and Kim, Zakiyyah Iman Jackson in Becoming Human: Matter and Meaning in an Antiblack World, and many more.


=== Jina B. Kim and Sami Schalk ===
In Reclaiming the Radical Politics of Self-Care: A Crip-of-Color Critique, the authors Jina B. Kim and Sami Schalk, who identify as people of color and/or queer. Dr. Kim is currently an Assistant Professor of English Language & Literature and of the Study of Women & Gender at Smith College. Dr. Schalk is an Associate Professor of Gender and Women’s studies at University of Wisconsin-Madison. They attribute parts of their critique to Audre Lorde’s work, A Burst of Light. As a Black lesbian woman battling breast cancer, Lorde details her experience about how she was not provided the care she felt she needed from medical providers. Her experiences led her to seek out her own form of self-care. In their critique, Kim and Schalk discuss how self-care has been commodified by mainstream culture. They argue that the original radical politics of self-care, which prioritized collective care and resistance against systemic oppression, have been eroded by individualism and consumerism. Kim and Schalk highlight how traditional models of self-care often fail to serve the unique needs and experiences of disabled people and people of color, and how these communities have developed their own practices of collective care and resistance. They also identify ways society can reimagine the world to better serve marginalized communities.     


=== Alyson K. Spurgas and Zoe C. Meleo-Erwin ===
Alyson K. Spurgas and Zoe C. Meleo-Erwin authored Decolonize Self-Care, a book that includes critiques about self-care practices and their relationship with key topics such as the medical industrial complex, neoliberalism, and feminism. Dr. Spurgas is an Associate Professor of Sociology at Trinity College. Dr. Meleo-Erwin has a background of public health and sociology which adds a critical public health context to their book. In recent years, especially with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the concept of self-care has gained significant traction with many people embracing the idea that taking care of oneself is crucial for overall well being. However, the authors emphasize that self-care is often marketed and commodified to reinforce harmful colonialist and patriarchal attitudes that undermine the importance of true self-care. Spurgas and Meleo-Erwin propose that decolonizing self-care entails challenging these harmful attitudes and recognizing that women’s experiences of discomfort, pain, and emotional distress are worthy of proper care and attention.


=== Johanna Hedva ===

In Johanna Hedva’s "Sick Woman Theory", Hedva questions and reflects upon the connotations and meanings of the words 'sick' and 'normal' from a perspective of someone with a chronic illness. Hedva references concepts like feminism and misogyny stating how they’re present in society, medicine, and care. The work argues that the body and mind are largely under the influence of pre-existing societal norms, beauty standards, and are defined by the oppressive, white-supremacist, capitalist regime of our society. Hedva pushes for a perspective that argues for illness as a mechanism of strength, instead of a detriment that defines someone as a whole or their worth. The term “sick woman,” Hedva posits, is an automatic form of oppression and degradation against any other minority community that differs from society’s definition of perfection: a “healthy man.” The author brings to light the increased sense of politicalization that surrounds healthcare and argues for the fundamental right of care for each and every human.


== Creative Works ==
There are many examples in the media of female hysteria, geared towards highlighting the flaws in the treatment and healthcare provided to women.


=== Charlotte Perkins Gilman ===

There are many examples in the media of female hysteria geared towards highlighting the flaws in the treatment and healthcare provided to women. "The Yellow Wallpaper" by Charlotte Perkins Gilman, is a short story that demonstrates the mistreatment of hysteria and illuminates the deep-rooted misogynistic systems that existed at the time. Published in 1892, this piece is an example of how media around feminist medical care has existed far before modern day. Throughout the story, the female protagonist is confined to an upstairs room at the instruction of her husband. Throughout her confinement, the protagonist becomes entranced with the yellow wallpaper. At one point she says there is a woman in it, which is a reflection of her mental state and unreliability as a narrator. The full meaning of the story is up to reader interpretation, but the ending is the outcome of a woman labeled and diagnosed with “hysteria” and not taken seriously by her male husband and male doctors. Through "The Yellow Wallpaper" Perkins shows the lack of care for women’s mental health and the condition of hysteria in the late 19th century.


=== Carol White ===

Another example is Todd Haynes’s film Safe. This film explores the psychological effects of sexism in healthcare that affect the psychological and physical health of females. It connects mental illness, feminism, and healthcare disparities in a way that demonstrates the deep-rooted sexism in the medical industry. Both Safe and "The Yellow Wallpaper" explore the differences between the way that men and women experience and view mental illness and healthcare. Similarly, in Fairchild’s article “Feminism is now”, she discusses modern misogyny and current examples of sexism in the modern world. The author argues against the idea that feminist goals have already been reached and uncovers how misogyny exists and is visible in many aspects of a female’s life.


=== The MIC ===

The Medical–industrial complex  and its accompanying visual (created by the MIC) is another example of flawed media that lacks the proper and necessary changes that would bring equality to the medical system. The visual specifically focuses on four quadrants: eugenics, desirability, charity and ableism, and population control. These categories lead to inherent ableism, sexism, and lack of care for oppressed minorities. Within this visual, the viewer is able to understand how the medical industrial complex promotes sterilization, forced healing, and other practices that leave people, especially women feeling on their own without a solid or trustworthy medical system to depend on. There are large systematic gaps within the complex, which the visual shows in the chart, excluding oppressed groups. Kiana Mickles writes on the impact that this exclusion has had on the black female community. She expands on the underlying sexism and racism in almost every aspect of this complex upon which all of healthcare operates. As an example, Mickles cites the life of Henrietta Lacks and the usage of her cells for decades after her death without her or her family’s knowledge. This is just one example among many of how the healthcare industry has excluded and failed Black people and women.


== See also ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Fairchild, Kimberly (November 2015). "Feminism is Now: Fighting Modern Misogyny and the Myth of the Post-Feminist Era: Modern Misogyny: Anti-Feminism in a Post-Feminist Era. By Kristin J. Anderson, New York, Oxford University Press, 2014. 183 pp. $29.95 (paperback). ISBN: 978-0-19-932817-8". Sex Roles. 73 (9–10): 453–455. doi:10.1007/s11199-015-0524-7. S2CID 255012952.
Spurgas, Alyson K. (2020). Diagnosing Desire: Biopolitics and Femininity Into the Twenty-first Century. Ohio State University Press. ISBN 978-0-8142-1451-0.
Katz, James D.; Seaman, Rachel; Diamond, Shari (May 2008). "Exposing Gender Bias in Medical Taxonomy: Toward Embracing a Gender Difference Without Disenfranchising Women". Women's Health Issues. 18 (3): 151–154. doi:10.1016/j.whi.2008.03.002. PMID 18457752.
Hedva, Johanna (2020). "Sick Woman Theory" (PDF). {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
Suslovic, Brianna (2 January 2023). "Hysterical Solidarity: An Embodied Reflection on Contemporary Sexual and Reproductive Rights Concerns in the United States". Studies in Gender and Sexuality. 24 (1): 21–27. doi:10.1080/15240657.2022.2161284. S2CID 257535669.
Greenhalgh, Ally (6 December 2022). "Medicine and Misogyny: The Misdiagnosis of Women". Confluence.
Villines, Zawn (25 October 2021). "Gender bias in healthcare: Examples and consequences". Medical News Today.
Jackson, Zakiyyah Iman (2020). Becoming Human. doi:10.18574/nyu/9781479890040.001.0001. ISBN 978-1-4798-3455-6.
Mickles, Kiana (October 2017). "Beyond J. Marion Sims: Black Women Have Been Fighting Discrimination in the Medical Industrial Complex for Centuries". CRWNMAG.
Kapsalis, Terri (2008). The Hysterical Alphabet. WhiteWalls. ISBN 9780945323167.
Libbrecht, Katrien (1995). Hysterical Psychosis: A Historical Survey. London: Transaction Publishers. ISBN 1-56000-181-X.
Micale, Mark S. (1995). Approaching Hysteria: Disease and its Interpretations. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-03717-5.
Micale, Mark S. (2009). Hysterical Men: The Hidden History of Male Nervous Illness. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-04098-4.
Micklem, Niel (1996). The Nature of Hysteria. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-12186-8.
Bronfen, Elisabeth (2014). The Knotted Subject: Hysteria and Its Discontents. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-6473-7.
Augsburg, Tanya (1996). Private Theatres Onstage (Hysteria and the Female Medical Subject). UMI.
Showalter, Elaine (1987). The Female Malady: Women, Madness and English Culture, 1830-1980. Virago. ISBN 978-0860688693.
Lewis Herman, Judith (1992). Trauma and Recovery: The Aftermath of Violence--From Domestic Abuse to Political Terror. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-08730-3.


== External links ==
Erika Kinetz, "Is Hysteria Real? Brain Images Say Yes" (The New York Times)
Female Hysteria during Victorian Era