Habibia High School (Dari: لیسه عالی حبیبیه) is a school in Kabul, Afghanistan which has educated many of the former and current Afghan elite, including former Presidents Ashraf Ghani and Hamid Karzai, as well as musician Ahmad Zahir. It was founded by King Habibullah Khan in 1903 and is considered one of the oldest Schools In Afghanistan. It is situated in the south of the city in a district known as Karteh Seh.
Over 18,000 students are studying in three different shifts. The undergraduate enrollment is approximately 2000 students.


== History ==

It suffered severe damage during the civil war of the 1990s between the different mujahideen factions who had ousted the communist government of Mohammad Najibullah in 1992.
The Indian government funded the rebuilding of the school in 2003, it committed $5 million for the restoration project. The restoration was completed in two years and the school was reopened in August 2005, by Afghan President Hamid Karzai and Indian Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh.In November 2021, a powerful magnetic roadside bomb exploded near the school.


== Notable alumni ==
Ashraf Ghani, former president of Afghanistan
Hamid Karzai, former president of Afghanistan
Mohammad Hashim Maiwandwal, former Prime Minister of Afghanistan
Mohammad Gul Khan Momand, former Home Minister of Afghanistan
Sibghatullah Mojaddedi, former President of Afghanistan
Mohammad Najibullah, former President of Afghanistan
Dr. Sayed Makhdoom Raheen, former Minister of Information and Culture
Mohammed Zahir Shah, former king of Afghanistan
Abdul Rahim Wardak, former Defence Minister of Afghanistan
Ahmad Zahir, legendary Afghan musician
Dr. Hafiz Sahar, former President and Chief Editor, Daily Eslah and Kabul University professor of Journalism
Wasef Bakhtari, prominent Afghan poet, writer, and literary figure
Mohammad Ghous Bashiri, Afghan politician


== Notable faculty ==
Faiz Mohammad Katib Hazara, historian
Richard N. Frye, Aga Khan Professor Emeritus of Iranian Studies at Harvard University


== See also ==
List of schools in Kabul
List of schools in Afghanistan


== References ==