Hélène-Gabrielle Fleury-Roy (21 June 1876 – 18 April 1957) was a French composer and the first woman to gain a prize at the prestigious Prix de Rome for composition.


== Background ==
Fleury was born in Carlepont, Department Oise, France. She studied with Henri Dallier, Charles-Marie Widor, and André Gedalge at the Paris Conservatory. In the late 1890s, she lived in La Ferte-sous-Jouarre (Seine-et-Marne). She sent compositions to the Journal Musical Santa Cecilia Reims Composition Competition, and won in 1899 with Symphony Allegro for organ.
Fleury-Roy was the first woman admitted in 1903 to the Prix de Rome competition. On her first attempt at the prize, she failed the fugue test, but the next year she tried again and succeeded with the cantata Medora (libretto: Édouard Adenis) for two male and one female voice. She was awarded a third prize in the Grand Prix.Hélène Fleury-Roy became a piano teacher after marrying her husband Louis Roy, a professor of mechanics at the university of Toulouse, in about 1906, and resided in Paris. In 1928, she became a professor at the Conservatory of Toulouse, teaching harmony, composition and piano. Her notable students at the conservatory included the conductor Louis Auriacombe (the future founder of the Toulouse Chamber Orchestra), composer Charles Chaynes, and violinist Pierre Dukan.She died in Saint-Gaudens, Haute-Garonne aged 80.


== Selected works ==
Fleury-Roy's works include songs, piano, violin, cello and organ pieces and a piano quartet.

Arabesque for piano
Bourree Gavotte for piano
Canzonetta for piano
Espérance piano
Fleur des champs for piano
La Nuit for piano
Minuetto for piano
Valse Caprice for piano
Coeur virginal, song
Mattutina, song
Brise du soir for violin
Trois pièces faciles for violin
Fantaisie for viola (or violin) and piano, Op. 18
Rêverie for cello
Quatuor for piano and strings
Pastorale for organ
Grand Fantaise de concert


== References ==


== External links ==
Free scores by Hélène Fleury-Roy at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP)