James Sharp (born 2 January 1976) is an English professional football player, who played as a defender.


== Career ==
Sharp was a relative latecomer to the professional game, having signed his first contract at the age of 24, an event preceded by a spell at non-league Andover. He started his professional football career with Hartlepool United in 2000. After 60 appearances in three years with Hartlepool & a player of the year award, Sharp fell out of favour at Hartlepool and moved to Scottish club Falkirk on a free transfer in 2003.
After a year-and-a-half with the Bairns, Sharp was loaned out to Brechin City in February 2005 until the end of the season. In which time, Sharp helped Brechin to the Division 2 title along with picking up a winners medal for Falkirk in same season as Falkirk claimed the Division 1 title. Sharp made his return to England with a free transfer to Torquay United in August 2005. Playing in 32 league matches in the 2005-06 season, Sharp was named captain of the club, but was released at the season's end.
After spending pre-season training with the club, Sharp was signed by Shrewsbury Town on a one-month contract on 8 August 2006. However, on 24 August 2006, Sharp chose to terminate the contract to pursue other options. He had played just 10 minutes for Shrewsbury — the final ten minutes of the League Cup first round match at Birmingham City, where Birmingham won via a late goal.Sharp was subsequently signed by Rochdale, debuting for them on 2 September 2006 in the 1–1 draw at home to Hereford United. His first goal for the club came against Shrewsbury, on 30 September, just a month after leaving them.
He was released by Rochdale at the end of the 2006-07 season and was signed by Scottish Second Division club Airdrie United. After a spell of 6 months with Airdrie, Sharp was forced to retire from the professional game through an achilles injury.


== References ==


== External links ==
Post War English & Scottish Football League A - Z Player's Transfer Database profile
James Sharp at Soccerbase