Albania is mostly mountainous, with the first alpine regions forming towards the end of the Jurassic period. During the Cenozoic era, the malformation of the Albanides accelerated, causing the subterranean landscape to take its present form. The average altitude of the country is 708 metres (2,323 ft), twice that of Europe. The highest summits are situated in the Albanian Alps and the eastern mountain range, with Korab being the highest peak, at 2,764 metres (9,068 ft) above sea level.
The country's geography is unique due to its location and varied relief, with landscapes ranging from mediterranean in the west to a more continental influence in the east, and mountainous terrain in the interior and east. This combination of plains, hills, and mountains has resulted in a diverse range of geographical features, extending horizontally and vertically. However, this complexity has made regionalization challenging, as different authors have used alternating criteria and methods. In the 1920s, Herbert Louis proposed a scheme that divided Albania into two large regions: Inner Albania and Coastal Albania, each with specific subdivisions. Louis' scheme was widely used until 1964, when it was replaced by Pandi Geço's proposed scheme which divided the country into four physiographic regions, listed as follows: Northern Mountain Region, Central Mountain Region, Southern Mountain Region, Western Lowlands and its hills. In 1985, Geço's scheme was improved through further research and consideration of ecological concerns, recapping all regions into 8 zones, 36 subzones and 93 sections.The earliest written accounts on the mountains of Albania can be attributed to German geographer Kurt Hassert, who explored the northern region of the country in June 1897, and carried out his first expedition to Mount Cukal.During the period of World War II, Distaptur Editions published a mountain guidebook titled "Montagne d'Albania" in 1941, authored by renowned Italian alpinist Piero Ghiglione and printed by the "Geographical Institute De Agostini of Novara". The guidebook includes a study of the rhapsodes of Albanian mountains by Nicola Lo Russo Attoma and contains 118 pages, featuring 60 black and white illustrations from photographs taken by Ghiglione.The first post-war mountaineering expedition in Albania was organized by the Committee of Physical Culture and Sports and was held at Mount Tomorr on July 27-28, 1949. A different expedition in the same mountain took place the following year on May 21, 1950, with Minella Kapo, a delegate from the highest forum leadership of the Committee in attendance to witness the name-changing ceremony of the main peak from Çuka e Tomorrit to Çuka Partizani. According to mounteneering expert Aleksandër Bojaxhi, the new designation of this mountain peak and others that followed, was not decided by party officials or institutions but by sports forums and even mountaineers themselves.The mountain peaks listed below are arranged by their massifs.  Occasionally, the highest peak of the massif is listed instead, if it holds greater notability. The remaining mountains on the list are important landmarks of biodiversity, history, culture and economic impact.


== Main peaks (+2,000 m) ==


== Main peaks (+1,000 m) ==


== See also ==

Protected areas of Albania
Geography of Albania


== References ==