Little Pink House is a 2017 American-Canadian biographical drama film written and directed by Courtney Moorehead Balaker and starring Catherine Keener as Susette Kelo.  It is based on the book "Little Pink House" by Jeff Benedict, which chronicles events related to Kelo v. City of New London, a U.S. Supreme Court case in which Kelo unsuccessfully sued the city of New London, Connecticut, for its controversial use of eminent domain.


== Plot ==
A small-town paramedic named Susette Kelo emerges as the reluctant leader of her working-class neighbors in their struggle to save their homes from political and corporate interests bent on seizing the land and handing it over to Pfizer Corporation. Ambitious academic Dr. Charlotte Wells, president of the fictional "Walthrop College" (in real life, Connecticut College President Claire Gaudiani) persuades the current governor (John G. Rowland, unnamed in the movie) that this could help his public image by increasing tax revenue for the poor. Susette's battle goes all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court and the controversial 5–4 decision in Kelo vs. City of New London gave government officials the power to bulldoze a neighborhood for the benefit of a multibillion-dollar corporation. The decision outraged Americans across the political spectrum, and that passion fueled reforms that helped curb eminent domain abuse.


== Cast ==
Catherine Keener as Susette Kelo
Jeanne Tripplehorn as Charlotte Wells
Aaron Douglas as Governor
Callum Keith Rennie
Colin Cunningham as Billy Von Winkle
Giacomo Baessato as Scott Bullock


== Reception ==
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 76%, based on 29 reviews, and an average rating of 6.19/10. The website's critics consensus reads: "Little Pink House rises up on the foundation of Catherine Keener's strong central performance, even if its fact-based story never quite fills in the framework. On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 55 out of 100, based on 13 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".A bipartisan congressional screening of the film was held at the U.S. Capitol.


== Accolades ==
Winner, HBO Audience Choice Award, Provincetown International Film Festival
Winner, Audience Choice Award, Vail Film Festival
Winner, Jimmy Stewart Legacy Award, Heartland Film Festival
Winner, Best Feature, Rainier Independent Film Festival
Winner, Grand Prize, Anthem Film Festival
Winner, Best Narrative, Anthem Film Festival
Winner, Best Original Score, Anthem Film Festival
Winner, Best Casting, Leo Awards
Finalist, Athena List
Nominee, The Faith and Freedom Award for Movies, Movieguide Awards
Nominee, Best Picture, Leo Awards
Nominee, Best Production Design, Leo Awards
Nominee, Best Costume Design, Leo Awards


== References ==


== External links ==
Little Pink House at IMDb
Little Pink House at Rotten Tomatoes