Logan Dooley (born September 26, 1987) is an American trampoline gymnast. Dooley has competed at both American national and international level and was named as one of the "Fresh Faces of the 2012 Summer Olympics" by USA Today.


== Early years ==
An active child from birth, Dooley's parents gave him a trampoline for his seventh birthday as an avenue through which to channel his energy and jumping impulses. Shortly after, Dooley's parents enlisted the instruction of trampoline coach, Robert Null, who coached Dooley until he retired.


== Competition ==
Dooley’s victory in a 2009 World Cup event in Ostend, Belgium, was the first ever World Cup victory by an American.  In 2010, Dooley and his partner, Steven Gluckstein earned the first gold medal for the United States at a World Championship event by winning the synchronised trampoline title. They took top honours for the seven-event series based on their performances in the event at the World Cup in Albacete, Spain, the Nissen Cup in Davos, Switzerland and the World Cup in Loulé, Portugal.Dooley was the champion in the male individual trampoline after taking out gold in 2010 during the Pan American Championships in Mexico. He also has won the gold in synchro at the 2008, 2010, and 2014 Pan American Championships.  Additional, he has won the US national synchronized trampoline title a total of six times.
Dooley is a four-time Olympian, serving as alternate in the 2008 Beijing and the 2012 London games and earning a spot to represent Team USA in 2016 in Rio where he finished 11th, which is the highest finish for a U.S. men’s trampolinist at the Olympics. He returned to the Olympics in 2020 as the coach of trampoline alternate, Charlotte Drury.
National competition results:

International competition results:


== Personal life ==
Dooley was born in Lake Forest, California, to Nancy and Jim Dooley.  He has three older brothers: Jeffrey, Ryan, and Erik.   Dooley graduated from El Torro High School in 2005 and has attended community colleges in Orange County and Colorado.  He also spent some time working at Disneyland in 2005-2006. Jim Dooley passed away in 2012. On August 31, 2019, Dooley married Erin Porras who is a nurse and also coaches at World Elite.


== Philanthropy ==
Dooley has been known to have a special interest in The Prentice School, which is an independent, non-profit school that Dooley describes as "dedicated to empowering students with dyslexia to build their foundation for success." An alumnus of the school and a sufferer of dyslexia himself, Dooley supports The Prentice School by guest speaking in their classrooms, at leadership conferences and at fundraising events for the school.


== Endorsement ==
Dooley endorses an Australian trampoline company, Vuly Trampolines. He has appeared in their 2009 product catalogue amongst other endorsement activities.  He is also endorsed by Eurotramp, a European trampoline manufacturer.


== References ==