The Gate of Mecca, Mecca Gate or Makkah Gate (Arabic: بوابة مكة Bawwābāt Makka), also known as Qur'an Gate (Arabic: بوابة القرآن Bawwābāt al-Qurʾān), is an arch gateway monumental on the Makkah al-Mukkarramah road of the Jeddah–Makkah Highway. It is the entrance to Mecca, the birthplace of the Islamic prophet Muhammad and signifies the boundary of the haram area of the city of Mecca, where non-Muslims are prohibited to enter.


== History ==
The Gate was built in 1979. Design was done by Dia Aziz Dia, and architect was Samir Elabd.
Mecca Mayor, Osama bin Fadl al-Bar, acts as Bawabat Makkah Co. Board of Directors Chairman. Complex Bawabat Makkah consists of 5 types of currently developing projects: Governmental Projects, Special Development Projects, Investment Projects, Non-profit Projects, and Funding Projects.


== Description ==

The gateway is built as an arch over the road, and consists of three main parts:

The main part is structure of Islam's Holy Book – Qur'an, sitting on a rehal (book stand).Reinforced concrete was used as primary building material; plastic, glass, wood and other materials are also present (e.g. Islamic luminous mosaics/vitrails beneath arches, arched entrances into premises etc.). Whole structure is decorated with various patterns and can get illuminated at night in many different ways.
Under structure there are palm trees planted in line along divide-island, as well as other lower trees and ornamental bushes growing on island around palms and at free land space beside four-laned parkway (divided highway). On its sides there is fine-cut boxwood inside tidy gardens, with shaped and perimeter fences, small parking lots and other auxiliary facilities extending into a big complex.


== See also ==
Dragon Gate
Gateway Arch
Jamaraat Bridge
Masjid-u-Shajarah
Holiest sites in Islam
Memorial gates and arches


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website  (in Arabic and English)
SaudiProjects' Entry (saudiprojects.net) (in Arabic)
Dia's official website (diafinearts.com) (in English)
Trip Advisor's review (tripadvisor.co.uk) (in English)
Nadia Masood's description (nadiamasood.com) (in English)