Povestea cu măr moramăr și păsărica a ciută (English: "The tale of the moramar apples and the little bird") is a Romanian fairy tale published as part of the collection ''Povești nemuritoare''.
It contains similarities to two tale types of the international Aarne-Thompson-Uther Index, ATU 550, "Bird, Horse and Princess", and ATU 551, "The Water of Life".


== Summary ==
A king has three sons, and is going blind. One day, he has a vision in a dream that only the titular moramar apples and the little bird can restore his sight, so his sons offer to go on a quest for the objects. The elder prince takes a fine horse and goes on his journey, when he meets an old woman begging for alms. He refuses her plight, and she curses him that his quest will fail. As the old woman predicted, he tries to cross a narrow bridge and falls into the water, then a fox turns him into a stone pillar. The same thing happens to his middle brother. When it is the youngest's turn, he gives some coins to the old woman, and confides in her about the dangerous quest ahead of him. The old woman gives him a crutch and a needle, in gratitude, and advises him to use the objects before he crosses the stream. He does as instructed and a beautful bridge opens the path for him. On the other side of the stream, the fox appears to him and promises to help him, since he was generous to it. With the fox's help, the prince takes part in a chain of quests: to get the moramar apples and the little bird, he has to procure the 24-legged horse with 12 heads from the zmeis; to get the horse from the zmeis, they order him to bring princess Ileana Cosinzeana.
The prince tries to cross the water to reach Ileana Cosinzeana's abode, and is attacked by a "tall person" when he tries to cross the water. The fox grabs the tall man from behind and forces him to become their new servant. Finally, he arrives at a beautiful garden, where Ileana sleeps with her twelve fairy handmaidens, and with two flowers under her head. The prince tries to take the princess, but accidentally wakes her up. She is told the whole story, and agrees to join the prince, but asks him to get a letter from her brother in the other world, a person named Măr Rotat. The prince asks how he can reach the other world, and the fox says he has to ask the fierarul pămîntului ('World Blacksmith') to shod his horse's shoes with iron and steel, and climb down a well. He descends the well and discovers Măr Rotat has died in the hands of a witch during a hunt. Following Măr Rotat's loyal hounds' advice, he retrieves Măr Rotat's eyes and heart and resurrects him. In gratitude, he gives the prince a letter, but he still has to come out of the underworld, so he finds a snake threatening a nest of eaglets, and kills it. The eagle mother appears to him and offers to take him out of the other world, by having the prince feed the bird with meat, bread and water on the journey upwards to the surface world.
The prince gathers cartloads of bread, cows and barrelfuls of wine, mounts on the eagle and begins his flight back to the surface. Next to the surface, the eagle asks for a last feeding, but the food is over, so the prince cuts off pieces of flesh from his body to feed the eagle one last time and complete the journey. The eagle then lands on the surface world, and comments with the prince on the sweetness of the last food, but notices the injuries on the human's body, and heals him.
Finally back home, the prince delivers Măr Rotat's letter to his sisters Ileana Cosinzeana, who reads its contents and decides to join with the prince in getting to the kingdom where the multiheaded, multilegged horse is held. Once there, the fox asks the prince what is his decision: to have the princess or the horse, to which the price replies he wants to have both. On hearing this, the fox turns into the princess to trick the kites (zmeis), and allows the prince to fetch the horse for himself. In the shape of the princess, the fox tells the zmeis she will take a short leave, and ties a string around her foot to assuage the zmeis. At a distance, the fox assumes its real form and meets with the prince and Ileana Consinzeana.
This repeats with the next kingdom: the prince decides to have the horse, the moramar tree and the bird for himself, so the fox turns into the horse and is delivered to the zmeis. Later that day, when it is put in the stables, the fox-as-horse darts off and goes to meet the prince, the princess and their servant. Finally, the group reaches the fox's house, and the animal points to two stone pillars: the prince's brothers, and asks the prince if it should restore them to life. The prince chooses to have them restored to life. The fox respects his decision, and turns them back into humans. The prince's brothers depart for their kingdom ahead of them, while the prince rests with the fox in its hut for three days.
After three days, the prince rides back to his father's kingdom and stops to sleep by a well. Suddenly, his brothers kill him, cut up his body, throw in the well and cover it with soil. Then, they force princess Ileana to keep quiet about it, lest she shares the prince's fate,and take the bird, the tree and the horse with them to the kingdom. However, the moramar tree and the bird do not interact and cannot cure the king.
Back to the prince, the fox rushes to the well and notices the grass on the well is red, marking the prince's grave. The fox digs up his corpse, douses him with water of death to restore his body, then water of life to revive him. After the prince wakes up, the fox admonishes him for choosing to revive his brothers, but gives him a magic cloak and departs. The prince goes back to his kingdom and finds some work with a blacksmith.
Some time later, princess Ileana Cosinzeana has a dream about a golden distaff with a golden spindle that spins by itself. The blacksmith is ordered to make one, but the prince asks to do it: he swishes the cloak the fox gave and creates the golden distaff, then goes to the castle's garden and takes out the golden distaff. Ileana sees the object from her window and smiles, the bird begins to sing and the moramar tree shakes a bit. The next day, she says that she wants another object she saw in a dream: a golden reel to spins thread with golden spool that gyrates by itself. The prince fashions the second object with the magic cloak and goes to the castle to show it by Ileana's window. Her smale grows even larger, and the tree and the sing react even more to their master.
Lastly, on the third day, Ileana says she wants golden hen with chicks that chirp to be made. Once again, the prince produces the golden object by waving the fox's cloak, then goes to show it to Ileana. The princess is overjoyed the prince has come, and so are the other objects he procures during his quest: the horse neighs in response to its master, the bird sings and the moramar tree dances. The prince goes to talk to his father about his brothers' deception, and is asked about how to deal with them. The prince answers a large shirt should be made, large enough to fit the three brothers; then they are to throw up spears, if they are guilty, the spears will kill them. The king fulfills his request: the three brothers throw their spears in the air; the prince's falls at his feet, while his brothers' fall squarely on them, killing them. After punishing his traitorous brothers, the prince marries princess Ileana Cosinzeana, and rules after his father.


== Analysis ==


=== Tale type ===
The tale contains similarities to two tale types of the international Aarne-Thompson-Uther Index: ATU 550, "Bird, Horse and Princess", and ATU 551, "The Water of Life". Scholars Stith Thompson and Hans-Jörg Uther remarked on their similarity of plots and likeness of motifs, which makes it difficult to index as either one type or the other.In type ATU 550, "Bird, Horse and Princess" (previously, "Quest for the Golden Bird"), a king may request the bird as the only thing that may cure him, so he dispatches his three sons on a quest for the bird. The elder two fail, are turned to stone or distract partway during their journey, and only the youngest prince braves on. Eventually, he finds the bird, but has to get involved in further quests (usually, for a horse and a princess). After the quests, he returns to save his brothers, who betray him and take the princess, the bird and the horse with themselves. At the end, the prince is saved by his animal helper and returns to the kingdom to unmask his traitorous brothers.In tale type ATU 551, "The Water of Life", the king usually is going blind, and asks his three sons to fetch him a remedy. Eventually, only the youngest finds the remedy, in the hands of a princess in a distant kingdom, then goes home, only to be betrayed by his elder brothers. Meanwhile, the princess wakes up and, noticing someone stole her possession, goes after the thief.


=== Motifs ===
In both tale types, the hero (the prince) is helped by an animal, which can be a fox or a wolf, giving advice to the hero, carrying him to continue the quest, and even reviving him after his brothers kill and betray him.


== Variants ==
In a tale translated to English as Boy-Beautiful, the Golden Apples, and the Were-Wolf, the sons of the emperor investigate who has been eating the emperor's prized apples, and the youngest prince (possibly Făt-Frumos) finds two shining golden feathers in the foliage. The prince then quests for the golden bird, the white saddle-horse with golden-bridle of another Emperor, and the golden-haired "divine Craiessa" ("queen").In the Romanian tale Povestea lupului năsdrăvan şi a Ilenei Cosinzene, a wolf helps the prince in his quest for the feather of a golden dove, a golden apple, a horse and the legendary princess Ileana Cosânzeana. When the king's other sons kill the prince, the apple wilts, the dove becomes a black raven and the horse and the princess vanish into the sky.In a tale titled The Wonderful Bird (Romanian: Pasărea măiastră), the king sends his sons for a bird to decorate a newly built church. His elder sons return with the bird and a poultry maid, the bird does not sing and the maid seems to be despondent. The youngest prince returns incognito to his father's kingdom and tells his story: the bird begins to sing when the prince enters the church, recognizing its master.In the tale Der Vogel des Paradieses ("The Bird of Paradise"), collected by Romanian ethnologue Pauline Schullerus from Harbachtal, the king wants to find the Bird of Paradise to become young again. The third prince's helper is an old man (implied by the narrative to be God Himself), and both quest for the Bird of Paradise, the horse of "Negru Dovedit", the saber of the Red King and the daughter of the Green King.In a variant from Bukovina translated into German as Der närrische Prinz ("The Foolish Prince"), a king has three sons, the elder two smart, but the third one considered a fool. He also has in his garden a tree that yields golden apples, which are stolen overnight by a mysterious thief. The three princes offer to keep watch on the tree at night, but the elder two fail and the third discovers the true culprit: a bird with golden feather and golden talons. He captures the bird and presents it to the king the next morning, but lets it escape, save for some feathers. The king then orders the three princes to get him the bird. The youngest prince begins his quest by finding an injured wolf and giving it a piece of meat. After the animal regains his strength, it aids the prince in a chains of quests: for the golden bird, a golden horse ("goldenes pferde") and for the princess that lives in the land where the Sun first shines.Romanian historian Nicolae Iorga translated a Romanian tale into French as Le fils cadet de l'empereur ("The Emperor's Youngest Son"). In this tale, an emperor has three sons, the elder two proud and arrogant, while the youngest is the bravest. The monarch also has a beautiful garden where lies a tree that produces golden blooms and golden fruits. However, one day, the golden fruits are disappearing, and the emperor orders his three sons to guard it at night. The elder two fail, but the youngest discovers the culprit: a bird with golden plumes. With the help of a talking wolf, the youngest prince gets the bird of golden plumage from the emperor of birds, an enchanted horse from another emperor, and the beautiful daughter of a prince that is kept away from people's eyes.


== See also ==
The Bird 'Grip'
The Golden Bird
The Greek Princess and the Young Gardener
Tsarevitch Ivan, the Firebird and the Gray Wolf
How Ian Direach got the Blue Falcon
The Nunda, Eater of People
The Water of Life (German fairy tale)


== References ==