Saas, Bahu Aur Flamingo is an Indian Hindi-language crime drama streaming television series created and directed by Homi Adajania. Produced by Dinesh Vijan under Maddock Films, it stars Dimple Kapadia, Radhika Madan, Isha Talwar, Angira Dhar, Deepak Dobriyal, Monica Dogra and Naseeruddin Shah with an ensemble cast. The series premiered on Disney+ Hotstar on 5 May 2023.


== Cast ==
Dimple Kapadia as Savitri alias 'Rani Baa'
Isha Talwar as Bijlee, Harish's wife and Savitri's eldest daughter-in-law
Angira Dhar as Kajal, Kapil's wife and Savitri's youngest daughter-in-law
Radhika Madan as Shanta, Savitri's daughter; Harish and Kapil's younger sister
Varun Mitra as Kapil, Savitri's younger son and Kajal's husband
Ashish Verma as Harish, Savitri's eldest son and Bijlee's husband
Deepak Dobriyal as Aagyo Dao alias 'Monk', Savitri's bitter rival
Naseeruddin Shah as Saheb-ji, Savitri's mentor
Monica Dogra as DJ Naina, Bijlee's lover
Udit Arora as Dhiman, Savitri's friend's son
Priyasha Bhardwaj as Young Savitri
Sandeep Sharma as Bhola, Savitri's Husband
Jimit Trivedi as Proshun Jain, Inspector  Mumbai NCB ACP
Vipin Sharma as Dil Samson
Mark Bennington as Donze, Savitri's initial chemist for her operation and lover
Sarika Singh as Shefu Jain, Proshun's wife
Rohan Singh as Birsa


== Soundtrack ==


== Reception ==
The Hindu wrote "The series is entertaining for its mollycoddling (in a mocking way) of fragile male egos."Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV wrote "No matter how firm and focussed the unbending Savitri is, reverses are a part of her existence. A backstory reveals the reasons behind the transformation of a Banjara woman into an imperious and impetuous ringleader."Sukanya Verma of Rediff.com felt the series overdoses on sex, violence and drugs and wrote in her review "There are attempts to document its crooked universe and its shady workings in detail like Farzi but none of the spunk. Guns and ghagras make for a fine punchline but the imagery feels bland in absence of emotions."A critic from India Today rated the series 3.5 stars out of 5 and wrote "Saas, Bahu Aur Flamingo is a show where women are the frontrunners. There’s no running-in-your-face feminism. It just feels too fair and fresh, different from the imposed shows of the same nature that you see. Here, women are no abla but can take on hordes of men, even when they are the least prepared."The Times of India wrote "The show's setting in the parched and arid land of north-western India is pitch perfect, and the costumes and makeup of each character is impressive. The rustic makeovers complete with ancient tattoos and ethnic ornaments have the requisite detailing."


== References ==


== See also ==
List of Disney+ Hotstar original programming


== External links ==
Saas, Bahu Aur Flamingo at IMDb